---
title: Fragments
layout: essay
status: 
firstPublished: "September 23, 2019"
lastEdit: "June 23, 2020"

menuInclude: no
menuLink: no
menuTopTitle: Essays
menuTopIndex: 1
menuSubs:
- title: Fragments
---

*[Thoughts about food delivery businesses](#foodDelivery)<br/>
[Magic: controlling the world with words](#Magic)<br/>
[Political Legitimacy](#PoliticalLegitimacy)<br/>
[Consumer unions VS. climate change](#ConsumerunionsVSclimatechange)<br/>
[Emergence of vocal language](#EmergenceOfVocalLangauge)<br/>
[Language Families](#LanguageFamilies)*



# <span id="Art">What is art</span>
Art is an object makipulated in such a way that it evokes a perception that transcends its medium(ñote: where medium simply means the category of objects ––distinctly recognized phenomena––  from which it is taken: paint, stones, a sound, human movements, video clips. It is worthy to note that this categoraization is first of all a construct of the human mind, that is, a mental operation rather than something “out there” and therefore varies from person to person, over a person's lifetime and subject to a person's immediate attention.


The words ‘medium’ already suggests 
Recognition is vital here
"cannot unsee" things


. When we look at a painting –– colorful brushstorkes on a canvas –– we don't just see the colors, we see a man and a woman and a field of wheat. It's not a pipe but it sure looks like it! A string stretched over a wooden box trembles and makes sounds in such a way that the body of the listeners trembles too. Floppy discs happen to make noise when they read floppy discs, but making them noise like anything recognizeable, like Bohemian Raphsody, is art. Moving the body in an evocative way is art. It's merely my friends, but for two hours I don't see my friends but the prince of Denmark and the king of France, an Augur and a knight, and matters of great importance seem to be at stake ––– that is art. An art is deemed bad if one does not fall under the illusion, that is, when the whole does not transcend the parts. The acting or the story is not convincing and one does not see a midwestern middle class family but a poor production effort; or one is not taken by Rothko's colorful expanses and sees nothing by that: expanses of paint on a canvas. Therefore 

# <span id="foodDelivery">Computation intensive natural languages</span>
	There's a trade-off in algorithms between computation and storage. An algorithm could employ storage to save results so that it won't have to compute them again in the future, or not. Say you have a program that calculates prime number, which you use for your nefarious plans. If the program saves the results on a hard-disc, the next day it could pull them out of memory –– which is very fast –– instead of recomputing them, which is rather slow. One can gain time by storing results, and gain storage by leaving things for future computations. How much computation-time is traded for how much storage varies from task to task. In Douglas Adams' *The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy* the supercomputer Deep Thought takes seven and a half million years to compute the “Answer to the Ultimate Question of Life, The Universe, and Everything”, an answer that can be stored on very little hard-disc space: ‘42’. To take a less fantastical example, if our task is to train a sophisticated neural networks on millions of images in order to classify a single picture, then the computation will be very long but the answer, say, 'cat' could be stored on little space (we are ignoring here the storage it takes to store the algorithm itself which is used to generate the neural network.) On the other hand, a program that merely outputs an endless list of subsequent integers starting from zero could fill up as much memory as you't let it have and rather fast. In fact, I think the speed of calculation is comparable to the speed of retrieving the result from memory had it been stored. That is, one would save very little time but storing there results on memory.
	
I was wondering if something can be said about natural langauges from this point of view. For example, the constructed language Toki Pona, a thought experience in langauges, has a vocabulary of 120 or so root words, that is, words that are in principal not deriveable from each other (as opposed to, in English for example, the words "derive", "derivable" and "derived", where being familiar with one of the words and the rules of the English langauge lets one derive the other ones). The notion that the language has merely 120 words is a conceit, however. Beside the ‘root words’ there are many words which are constructed out of the root words, such as *jan pona*, "good person", for friend. Nonetheless, even lists of compound toki pona words as they appear in text-books are limited in lenghts (and given the way these derived words are constructed, such lists cannot grow beyond a very low limit. Toki Pona allows no morphological changes and there you can march out only so many root words one after the other to convey a single meaning before it appears to be a joke to everyone involved). That means that whenever anyone wants to say something “new” they have to invent, that is, compute, not merely on the level of a sentence but on the level of lexemes, that is, on the level of the units that constitute the sentence; not just be creative and how you build a lego castle, but in creating the lego bricks themselves. This is so because when one says *sike moku* to mean “metabolism” one means something that goes beyond the ideas of “cycle” and “food/ eat”. Because the word is not ‘canonized’ but is a creative act, the hearer too needs to apply computation in order to decode the expression, which could alternatively mean a bagel (an edible torus), food chain (cycle of eating), a round of drinks, maybe even a plate (a circular object eaten from). 

Could it be said that toki pona is a "computation heavy" langauge, saving on storage? Probably not. Toki poni is used more as a thought experiment than as a tool of communication. To judge by online channels dedicated to the language, no conversation in toki pona lasts for very long before breaking off into a conversation in an alternative language, such as English, about the properties of toki pona. This is indeed in contrast to even other constructed languages that are utilized as such, such as Esperanto. For this reason the illusitory nature of toki pona's simplicity remains unperceived. Alternatively, one can say that toki pona is not a language *yet*, or that it is not even half-baked: a cake mix rather than a cake. One can easily imagine that had toki pona been used for communication, standardized “compound words” would have soon developed. Moreover, one can imagine that new root words would have emerged just as quick, if only because all toki pona would be speakers spoke other languages as well. Had one created some artificial conditions in which babies spoke only toki pona from birth, they were likely to introduce these root words themselves. And from this I'd say that Toki Pona does teach us something, namely, that a “simple language” is not one that has a small vocabulary or “few tenses” (which are, too, reconstructed, as it were, in toki pona, from the paltry available units), but one which is regular: currently employed language can be succinctly communicated (few exceptions such as irregular verb forms) and such that the encoding and decoding of new ideas easily follows from language already being used.
there are several manners by which one can define language simplicity. One can think of an ‘abstract simplicity’, or simply *simplicity*, which takes an approach akin to the derivation of all mathematics from set theory. In this case we only care about how compact the description is, that is, how many definitions of basic units ((U_1, U_2, U_3...U_n)) and of rules do we need in order to be able to reconstruct any mapping of signifier to signified. It does not concern itself how one writes or pronounces any of these basic units. 
However, to be a language, it has to refer to something outside itself. This means that it has to reflect in itself the complexities that exist in the world, or at least as far as one wants to communicate them. Mathematics is like a tablecloth pattern while language is like a world map: in the former case, if one knows the axioms, she could expend mathematics and the pattern even locked up in a cell. To expand a map, however, one must not only know the axioms of mapping, but be able to observe the world about. Therefore, a language's simplicity correpsonds to the degree/ extent at which it manages to re-employ the same rules across various phenomena, which, I think, is being done by finding isomorphisms in nature. In other words, the creators of the language ––community of speakers–– finds analogies in the world and subsumes their encoding under a single rule.(ñote: perhaps this is what makes metaphors aesthetically pleasing? (the lemon's the compression of information in art as pleasing) it suggests an analogy, and when it is recognized (as really being there) by the reader, there's a sense of joy at this.. akin to, I'd say, the one inherent in humour.)
Let us consider some examples. A very basic analogy is captures in tenses. The relationship between and “he cooked” and “he is cooking” is analogous to the one between “she walked” and “she is walking”. Namely, each pair describes a single phenomenon happening in different points in time –– the former in the past, the latter in the present. We recognize two different phenomena which we call “cooking” and “walking”, we recognize both as human activities, and once we know how to ascribe one action via langauge to a person in different times (past, present, future and so on) we know how to do so for other actions once we know how to call them -– we add ‘ed’ for past action, ‘ing’ for continous action and so on(ñote: of course, English is not regular here, so you have “ran”, “slept” and so on–– and this, indeed, adds to English's complexity: there are many “buts” to English rules). Next, these actions which are encoded in verbs find analogy with non-human phenomena such as “flowing”, with non-action states such as “standing” or “being” and in general with anything that is “happening” as oppesed to describing how it happening which are encoded as adverbs, as opposed to phenomena that are perceived as entities, encoded as nouns and so on. This of course depends on human perception and therefore is rather fluid; language is suggestive. When we look we can see either the forest or the trees. Therefore one phenomenon can be described as a noun in one language and as a verb in another,(ñote: of course here we make an analogy, too: between "verbs" in one langauge and in another) which would then affect how it could be spoken about and potencially, consequently, how one reasons about it–– if not internally(ñote: as Waif-shair would suggest), then upon verbal communication. For example, one phenomenon can be describes as a verb, “it's raining outside” or an adjective, “it's rainy outside”. In English one refers to rain as a noun only when its confinement in space (analogous to that of objects) is explicit in the sentences, such as “the rains of madrid are strong” or “he stepped into the house directly from the rain”. In English “I am feeling cold”* is “I'm cold” while in many langauges the latter formulation would mean “my body as an object is cold” while the phenomenon would be described as “to me (dative) it is cold (adverb)”
(try to recall: when "old" could describe two opposite things.. old in one sense but young/ new in another?)
A less basic analogy is made between time and space. The temporal relationship between events is described with the same language as the spatial relationship between objetcts: A before/ after B; a road is long and so is the movie; a rocket has a trajectory and a war too; parallel things either do not cross each other in time or are happening at the same time.
Since time is “one dimensional” while space is “three dimensional”, the manner by which one constructs the mapping from the former to the latter has a degree of freedom. In English as in all(?) European languages, the timeline is parallel to the spatial line that moves from the back forward. As for its direction, it is as if the phonemonon that is the world-propagating-through-time is coming towards us; that is, events are facing us and moving towards us. Events that have passed (passed!) are “behind us” and are “gone”; imminent ones are “upcoming”; an event that happens earlier happens “before”, those that happen later happen “after”. Events “follow” one another just as any objects on a curve do, and the most recent events that had happened is “last”. 
But some languages employ the analogy differenntly. For time Chinese employs the language that describes the spatial axis going from top to bottom (like its writing?), such that “morning” is “above noon” and “afternoon” is “below noon”, “next month” is “under month” and “previous month” is “above month”.


That is, the world's movement across time is from “the back” to “the front”, so that events that happened earlier in time happen 

the world moves 



a suggestion z

isomorphic conceptual structures. 

A second would be a, ‘biological/ mechanical simplicity’ or *easiness*, one that takes into consideration the manifestation/ realization of the language on the one hand ("U_1" is pronounced like /a/, and is represented in writing with this kind of symbol) and an idealized human being that is to employ the language. There are sounds that are audiobly similar (to get more technical, I assume one could construct a space, in the mathematical sense, into which sounds could me mapped. After one finds the boundries in this space which define the human pronounceable sounds, one could use simple eucledean distance as a a metric of similarity. One complication would be that human audition might be differentially sensitive to different sounds on this space. I don't mean through learning, but on a mecahical or innate mental faculties level like the one responsible for psychophysical Equal-loudness contour), such as the vowels in grin and green or two Mandarin words that are only differentiated in tone, and sounds that are different from each other such as ‘s’ and ‘u’. If we have a language where the substitution of a unit X with a unit in Y in some case would result in a plausible alternative meaning (a confusion) and if unit X and Y are similar in sound (or in writing, say, timidity and temerity, or current and correct) then we could say that its difficulty is increased, because employers of the language would have to develop a sensitive inner decipherer. An easy langague employs as  psychophysically-distant morphemes as there is a potential for confusing in the given case. The third and last would be ‘pragmatic simplicity’ or *tenability*, one which takes into account not just innate sensitivities but also learned ones; one that takes not an idealized person but the actual world, which considers either a particular person or a particular society, as well as the various means by which one could study a language.
One issue with the definition of (abstract) simplicity above is that, it seems to me, it is impossible to describe an exiting language this way. The founadations of mathematics describe a relationship between symbols; that mathematics are useful is because an outside observer –– a non-mathematical entity -- find an analogy between the structure of mathematics an the structure of something else in the world and thus employs it, the same way that a person employs the analogy between a good map and the city's streets in which he is standing, to find his way to a destination.
)

# let's try:
A simple language is a lanuage 
A language's simplicity is the degree/ extent to which it employs the same rules/ basic-units across isomorphic conceptual structures. 

time & space (before, after, long; using "where" when describing a moment in time; "parallel") trajectory
causality & time (since; and then) sequences
time & money (invest, lose, waste, have, spare, 
good/ bad (applied to various amount of things) (depends on morals, world view --- perception on a higher oredr)
one, two (whatever the object is vs. having a different numerator for different objects like in Japanese and Chinese (which in turn allows for the omission of the numbered when it had been already specified or is clear from context)

-> if you know what it means in one context, you can compute what it means in another context ("long road" ~> "long time"; "pocket money" ("pocket time"?)
-> if you know what is the case for isomorphic structures A and B, and you know the language that can span structure A, and you know one basic unit (or does it depend on the dimensionality of the phoneomenon, as it were...?) for B, you can generate all the units of B (think verb conjugation)



# ~~~~~

(language embeds also rules for categorizing/ modelling reality? As in, analogy between before in time and before in space? Or is that merely a rule of the language? yes.. a certain simplification...
Is the reason why in Chinese temporal precedence and antecedence are analogous to up and down because they write from top to bottom? But no, in English "after" and "before" is like in "coming after me"--> if you walk "after me" in space you will also arrive "after me" in time since we walk foward.
)

Verlan: an example of a tenable language: its expansion relies on very simple rules, but requires knowledge of the french language. since its expansion is



The fact that toki pona couldn't avoid the expansion of its vocabulary had it been in regular use has to do with the fact that humans, as opposed to computers, cannot be dictated what to retain in memory and what to discard. Had one heard *sike moku* used several times for “metabolism”, the next time he could'nt help but retrieve this meaning from memory. Computation would be employed only if this retrieval proved to be discrepant within the context or with expectations –– for example, had it been used to mean “bagel” and a decryption to “metabolism” would result in a nonsensical word.
This fact, I'd say, also explains the phenomenon whereby euphemistic words “drift”. All languages vary over time (an interesting question to pose is “why”; could one in any meaningful way measure language change velocity and correlate it to something, say, social changes?), but euphemisms get old rather quickly (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Euphemism#Lifespan). The decoding of many euphemisms add to the requirement to retrieve a meaning from memory a requirement to perform computation. Supposedly, when it first appeared, the word *restroom* required one more than decoding its two constituting components, “rest” and “room”. By the time one decoded the meaning of this mysterious expression, the encoder had already gone, and the decoder had either drifted into its inner world of thoughts if alone or into the continuing conversation if in company, a temporal distance that smoothes if not removes completely the elicitation of any offence. However, once a euphemistic expression coems to wide usage, the computation is replaced by storage, elimintating the euphemistic effect, leaving one with a direct signifier, to the point that the “origianl meaning” of the substrate, so to speak, is lost and forgotten, as in the case of “toilet”.
In this context, it is interesting to note the perseverence of “fuck”. In his “Down and Out in Paris and London”, Orwell described the cant employed on the streets, and how quickly the expressions evolve from one period to the next. He presents “fuck” as a recent innovation, and predicts its imminent supplantation ––– yet here we are, 90 years later, with the word still being used. I think what happened here is a curious inversion. The word came to be used in many different ways that have nothing to do with “its actual meaning”. If many euphemistic expression use “plain words” to express unsavory ideas, fuck is used often the other way around, as in, “fucking great” where an unsavory word is being used to express a plain meaning. So “fuck” reamains with us, but I think that using it to mean “intercourse” or “have intercoure” is considered very vulgar, while using it as an intensifier is not, even if it would not be used in the forum of the parliament.  

(About flirting: being eindeutig is not necessarily an abolute value of language)


https://youtu.be/TzmmskkuKlM?list=PLPJ9LLQi9QhPfs_P11K36dAhnBLLbYrzi&t=2419
Narrator: The dreadfulness of everyday life provided rich material for one student comedy group. They filmed this spoof New Year's broadcast by Romanian TV for their private amusement. But before any public performances, all their sketches had to be approved by the
censors.
- It reached the height of stupidity when the Ministry of Culture and Communist Education, I hope my memory is not betraying me and this was the actual name, had issued a list of forbidden words. These words weren't allowed on stage, in shows, on TV and newspapers, anywhere else.
disorder she needs one day well as yes
- Yes, newspapers too.
- So these words were forbidden.
Narrator: One forbidden word was ‘dollar’. The censors assumed that anyone who used the word must be an enemy of the working class.
- One of the jokes was that as we couldn't say the word dollar, we claimed we had bought a piece of machinery with rubles. The censors were outraged by this as well and wrote on our script “any other currency”. And we said exactly that, “we bought this piece
of machinery for three hunderd any other currency”. The audience burst into hysterical laughter. It was funnier than any other
word we could have used. 
- Because the student audience gotten down to the fact that we've been censored. The censor, a really nice guy, didn't want to impose on us the alternative to the word dollar. So he allowed us to choose any other currency as long as it wasn't the dollar. But we took it literally.


# <span id="foodDelivery">Online Feudalism</span>
There was a move in the last couple of decades towards centralization in the realm of commerce. Google had become the main interface between the internet and its users, later sharing this title, in a way, with Facebook. Youtube is the standard for streaming video online and is replacing television in many ways. Online food ordering services such as those of Just Eat Takeaway are turning into an exclusive interface between the "home diner" and the restaurant. What unites all of these is that what they are creating is not substance, but the container for it; they are not an industry in the old sense of the word but an infrastructure. Google is not a website, Amazon doesn't manufacture, Youtube doesn't make videos and nobody at Just Eat Takeaway cooks. 

There's a similarity between this contemporary situation and the feudal system of old. Feudal lords rendered their domain: they maintained an armed force that protected it from external threats, enforced internal order, and –– depending on time, place and custom –– maintained order in other ways such as keeping roads, holding courts of justice and so on. In return, whether freely or per coercion, they collected taxes and raised levies. 

In an analogous –– even if very different –– way, the above companies are, too, renderers of their domain. The process that of feudalisation that first occured between geographical boundries upon earthly territories now repeats itself inside the online world generated by servers and computer networks and web browsers. A merchant a millenium ago could have tried to vend in the wilderness, avoiding the tolls of market towns, but what sort of clientele would he have had? Similarly, a restaurant in the middle of the city might opt out of being represented in a food delivery platform, but if there's a rising culture of dining on deliverants and if a significant bulk of restaurants' revenue comes from that source, and all else being equal, it would close down sooner or later, if we suppose that rents for restaurant spaces would catch up and that that restaurant would stop being competitive –– assuming that nobody would go eat in restaurants whose main appeal is that they are "off the grid" (though writing this down it immediately strikes me as a potential future "hipster trend"). 
This assumes that running one's own couriers is disadvantageous to having their provision managed by a third party, which might be the case but nontheless is somewhat iffy. Alternatively, the restaurant might persevere at disadvantageous financial circumstances, which seems unlikely to go on for long assuming the motivation for opting out of being part of the grid in the first place was a move to avoid being taken advantage of, that is, opting to earn more. If at the end one earns thus less, the only reason to stay off the grid would be based on principle, and unfortunately or not, Luddites do not persist for very long.

A recent scandal shows what sort of clout such a centralized agency could have. GrubHub

Yelp can provide whatever information it wants. Any number, any reviews, can control how reviews are given, shown.. and then it has grate power if it teams with some one who does delivery or wahtever

(also in German Yelp different number)

An alternative to just succumbing to this is "going Swiss": the restaurants ccome up with their own infrastructure they own, their own directory/ app with a listing of the restaurants, their menus, their phones and delivery service. 

now happening

ensured the safty of their domain, 


AR, but... the online world is different



Amazon
Google
Youtube 
Just Eat Takeaway


data = new oil
/ our most valuable resources

No, I don't think so. 

the bigger pie



# <span id="Magic">Magic: controlling the world with words</span>

The notion of words being able to control the world are as old as history, appearing in Mesopotamian myth. Magic is seen as unnatural, supernatural –– of course, most people cannot affect the world through words –– foremost an ability of the gods, though also that of holymen who use incantations and rituals in order to influence the world, mostly through communication with the gods. The Bible starts with god creating light by saying "there will be light". Priests and religious people employ prayer –– again a verbal invocation –– to bid god, to bless themselves and others. 

> Second, the term "public" signifies the world itself, in so far as it is common to all of us and distinguished from our privately owned place in it. This world, however, is not identical with the earth or with nature, as the limited space for the movement of men and the general condition of organic life. It is related, rather, to the human artifact, the fabrication of human hands, as well as to affairs which go on among those who inhabit the man-made world together. To live together in the world means essentially that a world of things is between those who have it in common, as a table is located between those who sit around it; the world, like every in-between, relates and separates men at the same time.[^ArendtWorld]

[^ArendtWorld]: Hannah Arendt, The Human Condition, second edition, p. 52.

Perhaps in some way something like "magic" did likewise exist at least as long as history did. If one indeed thinks of "the world" not as nature and the earth, but the World of Men, then indeed words have had exercised much control over it. What is a ruler if not a person who controls the world through words? He does not plough the earth but makes the earth be ploughed for him; he doesn't necessarily involve himself in battle and yet "he conquers".

Recent years saw the emergence of a new world, a substitute world, where something like magic is "natural" to it rather than supernatural. This world, the "virtual world" of the internet, ever increasingly occupies the minds of humans, and is erected solely through language, even if it is upheld by infrastructure that exists in the natural world. This language is programming language rather than human language (a distinction that is not unlike that between magic spells and prosaic language), and nonetheless it is manmade.<br/>
In the movie *The Matrix*, Neo –– who is the programmer and hacker Thomas Anderson outside the Matrix –– gains control over the world by realizing its illusory nature – "there is no spoon". There's an inversion in this film: the world that we know outside the movie becomes a fictional one, the simulated output of machines, while the fantastical world where machines had taken over the world and enslaved humanity is the "real world", where humans are feeble and magic does not exist. But perhaps there's a certain similar inversion happening in the "real world" too. As the meaningful order of the world becomes larger, as the significance of the good will of friends and of the relationship with family members shrinks vis-à-vis world politics, the internet as a medium between the individual and the world and its order rises in dominance.<br/>
But this world, again, is manmade and is controlled by men. While words are epiphenomenal to the earth, as it were, they are that which creates the world of the internet. In this world things can be created out of nothingness through words, for, indeed, the only substance of this world are words. Unlike goats, chairs, houses or grazing rights, things are being sold there that had not been in existence until the very moment of exchange. A person buying a "premium account", or a player buying some fancy item in an MMORPG, is gaining something that might be to his advantage, but which is as fictional as the world he is interacting with. Something is being given, but nothing had been taken away.

<hr/>

# <span id="PoliticalLegitimacy">Political Legitimacy</span>
At least since the Enlightenment, legitimacy has been discussed by political philosophers. Some said legitimacy came from god, others said it came from the people, yet others ascribed its source in certain principles. Yet all treatments I have thus far encountered seem to me to be misguided. <br/>
As a point of departure, I'd like to start with the word itself. Ultimately, the word comes from the word for "law". That is, something is legitimate if it's legal, lawful. However, "legitimate" is not the same as "legal"; the latter denotes whether an action agrees with the laws of an existing government, while "legitimate" refers to some loftier frame of reference. Wikitionary currently defines "legitimate" as:<br/>
1. In accordance with the law or established legal forms and requirements.
2. Conforming to known principles, or established or accepted rules or standards; valid. 
3. Authentic, real, genuine. 
4. Lawfully begotten, i.e., born to a legally married couple. 
5. Relating to hereditary rights.

The second is the relevant one here. What all these political philosopher therefore discuss, promote and reject are different principles by which to judge one or the other government. And I think the error starts in the word and the ideas it represents.<br/>
Laws are derived from the state, their significance depends on its existence. That an action I have committed is illegal is significant only so far as there being a government which would enforce the law. Whether I personally judge that an action I or another committed was "lawful" or "not lawful" is insignificant; if a government existed then it would be its judgement that mattered, and if there wasn't one then the modifier "lawful" would altogether be meaningless.<br/>
Locke's assertion that it's the people who give legitimacy to the government was antithetical, that is, it was an oppositional response to, a refutation of, the contemporary conventional thought. However, this simple substitution of one noun with another, "God" with "people", puts the word "legitimacy" out of place. The legality of an act depends on something above and beyond the act itself, namely, a legal system. Similarly, the legality of a government could be a meaningful notion only given a higher context in which the government could be judged, such as the court of an almighty and transcendent god. The "people" cannot fulfill this role anymore than the Baron Munchausen could have gotten himself out of the mire by pulling his own pigtail. The "people" already have a relationship with the government, namely, they are governed by it. Even if we assumed "the people" to be a unified agency (this not being the case is another, though related, issue) which could therefore have a "will", we are left with a state where the people have an arbitrary power over the government which was supposed to control the former. You cannot say something is regulated if it controls itself, nor that a standard is being followed if that which is supposed to follow it can arbitrarily change it. 

Now, you might deem it a useless playing with words, but I think it's advantageous to be precise here. Presumably everyone understands the word "legitimate" as menaing "acceptable", that is, a legitimate government is a government that is or should be accepted. Those who are to accept it, once we revoke god's lofty prerogative, are the people. However, the people are not a unified agency, and it's questionable how useful is the adjective "acceptable" here.
What does it matter, or, even, what does it even mean for a government to be "acceptable"? If Alice makes an offer to Bob, he might either accept or reject it. But the governed are not a single agency, and they cannot accept or reject anything by any means, at least not in the same sense of the word. That some elements thereof could unite and, say, topple the government or run a campaign is another matter. Look at Brexit. Have the British people decided to separate from the EU?

What makes a nation a unit is the coordination of its people. What makes Germany Germany and France France, and what makes each not the other, is that every person within each of their boundaries behaves as if she was part of that one nation. The Germans speak German and obey German laws, the French obey French laws. If all Germans suddenly behaved as if Alsace was part of Germany, and if all the people of Alsace behaved as if Alsace was part of Germany, then Alsace would become part of Germany and nothing could have been done by France to change that short of bringing the army which would have perceived by German as an incursion. But, of course, such magical instantaneous changes of heart are not possible ––– which is a main part of my treatise here. 

For a very long time I was baffled by the phenomena of conquering (one nation taking over another) and of coups d'état. How can a group of people take over a whole country simply by entering a single building, i.e. the seat of government, and wreaking havoc inside? Surely, these are not always successful. But sometimes they are. How so?<br/>
Of course, one cannot take over a country unless it's already in existence, and therein lies the answer. A whole bureaucratic mechanism is already in place and one simply replaces –– often by applying violence –– the "top". Everybody else behaves as they have before: going to work, going to the store, obeying laws, paying taxes. The taxman ultimately takes the money to somebody else, but in some sense it is of no concern to the taxpayer. Laws, too, might change; these changes might be to the liking or to the disliking to any one citizen, but before the coup they were not obeying the law because they necessarily thought the law was good, but because the it was believed that the law was enforced and that disobeying it incured penalties. Policemen might choose to quit their job but then they would have to look for a new job. Or they might choose to stay, serving a new government. Voila.<br/>
The entirety of the population might think the new government is bad, "illegitimate", but they are not telepathic and therefore incapable of carrying out the required coordinated action/ behaviour to undo the takeover. It is only a select number of people who act under the gun barrel of the new regime, but everybody has something to lose. A worker who strikes would lose his livelihood. Had all workers went on a strike at once, or, more simply, refused to pay taxes, in protest, the usurpers would have been ousted; the usurpers cannot lockdown or shoot down everybody, and even if they could, there would have been little advantage in taking over the government –– but, again, people are not telepathic and therefore incapable of such coordination.<br/>
The word "such" immediately above stands for "instantaneous", "absolute", "precise" and "all encompassing"; for humans, as in the Germany and France example above, *are* capable of coordination in general. This coordination depends on its conceptualization in the minds of the coordinated, and its formulation and propagation is mediated through language. 

Part of the issue with the line of thinking of all these political philosophers –– and I think the usage of the word "legitimacy" exemplifies it –– is their notion that they are describing universal and general principles. They see themselves as approaching the problem from the outside, describing principles as transcendent as god used to be in relation to the state. And yet, however astute they might be, each of them is but one of many, and their words have the same position as the words and deeds of any other person within a political system. One might read their writings as philosophy, as a mental exercise, and have them at the same shelf as other sci-fi and fantasy books. But isn't their intention to influence society and politics? Lead to action? One might deem it a Marxist stance, have philosophers not merely think but act, but I'd say that many political philosophers have an imperative in their writing, if not a smug tint to it; they never pretend to talk about some other world, but suggest that they know how best things are to be ran in this one. And others saw this as their intention too, which is why Socrates was given Hemlock and Rousseau had to flee France. However, their potencial to influence political structure depends on their work's power as political action or as a driver of such action, a power the work is precluded from having by their theoretical external stance; indeed, perhaps they have it even less than some works of fiction. The audience they preach to is already part of a greater order, full of agents and complexities, interests that differ from that of the writer and the readers. They imagine that they could produce a new order, as if ex-nihilo, like a writer of science fiction, with the wave of their pen. Sure, "if everybody just behaved nicely we would have had a good society to live in" –– but why should anyone behave nicely? What makes a society good? What is society? And why should anyone listen to YOU?<br/>

Of course, there has been more than a few inciters of sedition who brandished a book as they spnarheaded their band or revolutionaries. But from then on it was politics rather than theory. By which I mean not that the theory was realized albit none perfectly, but that the theory provided very poor theory of what would happen if an effort was made to apply it, ostensibely or sincerily. What relation is there between Jesus's or the Buddha's teaching and nowaday's church or Buddhist orders? I find that the first sentence of the first volume of Rousseau's *Emile* is telling:
> Tout est bien, sortant des mains de l'Auteur des choses; tout dégénere entre les mains de l’homme.[^Emille]

[^Emille]: Everything is good coming out of the hands of the Author of things; everything degenerates in the hands of Man. 

This could easily be thought of as the stance of a political philosopher as he observes –– perhaps from heaven –– the implementation of his creed by people. Make no mistake, however. If I see a sound blueprint of, say, a locomotive and some engineer builds it and it doesn't run, or, worse, looks nothig like the draught, I'd blame the engineer for poor execution. In the case of political theory, however, a sound looking theory that executes badly is the faulty element to be blamed, not its followers who at worst were naive or stupid (which of course sometimes is pretty bad). One can imagine an excusable scenario of a conspiring cadre that abuses maliciously the trust put in them by innocent others, but I'd be reluctant to believe any such story; of course any system can be broken. But if a political theory doesn't take into account the fact that people vary in how trusting they are, how credible they are, how cooperative and how much of promoters of their own self-interests they are, then it is as good as opium is good for silencing a crying baby, or as good as a bridge with a gaping hole in the middle. 

It is not the case that I think that political philosophy cannot be instructive and useful (becoming used). It is merely that I think that so called philosophers have been systematically committing the same error of being supposedly uninvolved (universal) and very particular at the same time. Though –– it comes to me now as an after-thought –– it might be the readers who had committed the folly of regarding these writings as universal rather than, say, dialectcal, a response to conditions of a particular time and space.<br/>
Obviously writing can be politically intsructive and useful. Take the code of law or the constitution as an easy example. But let us not forget what words are and are not. Words are a medium of communication, allowing a person to deliver information to a fellow: relate knowledge about what is, what could be, &c. A properly plausible reply to "God bequeathed the right to rule upon the divine King" or "The labour a worker puts into an object turns into to his property" is "up yours".<br/>
What made any constitution ever acceptable? The interests of the acceptees –– the authoers and constituents of the polity –– whether it inspired them with visions of a bright future, or the seventh brigade was at the outrkists of their towns with dyspeptic faces on. Bringing about a particular sociopolitical order is a political and social affair, not an engineering problem.

I think a person who comes very close to an idea that corresponds to what I think political philosophy should be is Rawles and his "original position" thought experiment. His work was still done in the same manner as the philosophers before him, which makes me think of the epicycle theories predating the Copernican Revolution[^CopernicanReovlution] or the handwringing, at the turn of the 20th century, prompted by various physical facts before the formulation of quantum physics –– but I think we are getting close.<br/>
What Rawls gets right, I'd say, is the need for a consensus of the entire society around a simple principle –– more implicit than explicit in his writing. He gets wrong several things, however. First, like those coming before him, he imagines order as something that *exists* rather than *being enacted*. Second, he turns a political problem into an apolitical one,[^Apolitical] and like Socrates crowns himself a philosopher king, only under a guise and without taking up the throne: when he asks what people would choose had they been blinded by the veil of ignorance, he assumes that (1) everyone would choose the same way; consequently, (2) he asks the reader what *she* would choose. "Consequently" because if everyone would choose the same, whatever I choose corresponds to what everyone would. And then, of course, Rawls proceeds to answer the question for us. Rigarding point 1, it is not clear how it could be otherwise; i.e. how a person could be different than others without knowing it, or, alternatively, why anyone would choose differently if they were the same.[^ChoosingIgnorantly] In short, his recipe is static and apolitical ––– it is not clear why anyone should or would take up his thought experiment and its presumeable consequences, why anyone would try to create his "what if" world.

[^CopernicanReovlution]: How aptly named.

[^Apolitical]: Meaning it disregards the multiplicity of men, to paraphrase Arendt.

[^ChoosingIgnorantly]: Admittedly, I can imagine some sort of brain damage that would lead a person to be comepletely unaware of their own person, such that whenever they are asked "what would make a good society" they would answer without thinking about themselves. However, one can almost imagine that in that case they would be even more prone to promote their held-beliefs ("The strong/ smart/ white/ black/ blue/ rich should rule") since they are unable to make "self-conscious corrections", i.e. make corrections to whatever they express based on the knowledge that who/what they are have to do with it. In conversation, this correction serves to make a speaker seem less biased: the self-conscious person knows that the audience knows who they are, and would judge their words accordinly (it is one thing if a slave exlaims that slaves should be freed, and another if it's a freeman saying that). There is no deliberation in Rawls's thought experiment, but I'd say that one would have to be aware of one's self in order to figure out that the reason they hold that "X should rule" is because they are X themselves. This is not triviala: I can imagine a certain profile of people being the most adequate for fulfilling the task of, say, a judge, or a doctor, without having that profile myself. Without knowing who I am I couldn't judge whether my opinion about "the best profile of a person to fulfill task X" has to do with who I am or is rooted in an impartial principle that I hold to be true.<br/>
	This is of course not the end of it; like most thought experiments it exercises the mind but has little to do with what is or could be.
<hr/>

# <span id="ConsumerunionsVSclimatechange">Consumer unions VS. climate change</span>


A trade union betters the working conditions of its members by making decisions on their behalf. For example, as far as wages are concerned, it is the union that bargains with the employer rather than the individual. There's necessarily a gap between the lower rate at which a worker would be willing to work and the higher rate at which it would still be profitable for the employer to employ. By voluntarily forgoing his autonomy (and relying on the fact that others in his trade do the same) the worker strengthens his bargaining power. The choice to push for a higher wage is not his own insistence, but a collective's. Workers have an incentive to join a union since it furthers their interests, and employers have an interest to employ as the employment is still beneficial to them. 

One of the big issues facing the solution/ mitigation of climate change and other environmental problems is that legislation is very slow, and, therefore, there is not enough collective action.[^CollectiveActionLaw] A "consumer" who thinks that it is completely insignificant vis-à-vis the environment whether he recycles or not, whether he drives a fossil-fueled car, an electric car or simply bikes, is correct. *It is* insignificant. My decision to take a tote to the supermarket to avoid using nylon bags does not affect at all the packing decisions of other supermarket goers.[^SupermarketBag] My decision to use less electricity at home does not affect other home owners. Most importantly, everybody knows that. Writing opinion pieces in the newspaper would not change that fact one bit. The daily consumption of nylon bags is governed by millions of independent decisions, not by mine or yours.

What if, on the other hand, consumers unionized? What if their purchasing decisions were collective, so that they could as one decide to boycott a product because its producer heavily polluted or because it was packaged in unnecessary amount of plastic packaging, or boycott a supermarket because it offered nylon bags? If such a union was big enough, it would be the producers' and distributors' interests to comply with such demands.

[^CollectiveActionLaw]: If something seems off in the sentence, it is probably because "action" means something else than "behaviour", which the law regulates. Indeed, we could say that "by definition" human activity which is regulated *is* "behaviour" (as in "behave yourself") while "action" is that which breaks off from the ordinary, the expected.<br/>
	Perhaps "collective reaction" would have fit better, or maybe "collective reactive behaviour", for we adjust our behaviour to mitigate the impeding doom of climate change. This apropos might capture one of the challenges of solving the problem: unlike toppling a foreign evil government or saving a damsel in distress,  reverting human impact is not an act to be done, not an action with everything associated with it, but an unending process to adopt, a change of habits. Ungalamorous and quotidian. Throwing a clog into the turbines of an oil power plant is heroic but probably not very effective, while devesting polluting energy is effective but unheroic.<br>
	With this disambiguation in mind, and regading "collective action" being any equivalent action being undertaken by multiple agents for the same reason –– as opposed to a coincidence: a strike of a union vs. the unlikely scenario that a thousand workers decided all at once in the same day and independently to strike –– I think it would not be contentious to say that law is the prime drive today of collective action. The citizens of most countries don't chip in to build roads and powerlines because they are generous or even because everybody else does it (even if they assume this to be the case), but because the law sets a tax rate and they would get in trouble if they didn't. 

[^SupermarketBag]: Potentially it would inspire witnesses to do the same, but that's a very small footprint, but that's a very small potential.

This idea has many issues.<br/>
First, as is mostly the case in modern times, while employers and employees have a contract establishing the relationship between them, no such contract exists between buyers and sellers; the market is free. I'd say trade unions act mostly by obtaining better conditions (e.g. contracts, construction of safer working facilities &c) than by influencing any single interaction. The interaction between buyers and sellers is mostly impersonal; for the worker, unless one is a daily wager, it is important to be recognized personally by the employer so they could, for example, pay them at the end of the month. When one goes to the supermarket, one's identity is not checked; shopping is essentially annonymous. It's impossible to have a consumers union if consumers are not identified as persons, that is, if they remain anonymous.<br/>
Second, unlike the case of trade unions, here it is not a win-win situation for the union's members. While a worker who doesn't unionize might find a deal with an employer quicker, ultimately it would be to his disadvantage in the form of worse employment conditions. On the other hand, it would be usually to the advantage of consumers to break-off their unions and, for example, buy the less expensive or more convenient but less environmentally/ ideologically friendly product.<br/>
In order for such consumers unions to be viable they must provide an advantage for their members. This advantage can be ideological –– giving a sense to their members of making a significant ecological change –– but given the economical system in place, that advantage would probably have to eventually be economical as well, whatever the shape of that advantage be. 

# <span id="EmergenceOfVocalLangauge">Emergence of vocal language</span>

Breathing provides humans the oxygen required by their metabolism. Certain states affect and alter the rhythm of breathing; exertion demands faster circulation and therefore faster breathing.<br/>
Breathing also happens to be audible. Given the relationship between state (physiological, menatl) and breathing, hearkening another's breathing pattern might provide useful information. Could it be that such attention has evolved among humans, paving the way for the evolution of the faculties that made language possible?<br/>
Nowadays many inhalations and exhalations are very expressive: gasping, sighing, huffing, laughing, moaning, yawning, snickering.
<hr/>

# <span id="LanguageFamilies">Language Families</span>

The idea of the commonlality of European and Indian languagees and their being part of a "Indoeuropean family of languages" came at a time when the revolutionary theory of biological evolution had already impinged itself on the thouguts of Western people, not the least with the idea of a dynamic rather than a static nature. It is understandable that the metaphor of the family readily lent intself: Sanskrit was similar to Latin and Greek but different, just like a finch of one island was similar but different from that of another.<br/>

It has become increasingly clear that the analogy of the tree --- treating the descent of species as if they were individuals in a genealogy --- was inadequate in biology. This should have been almost expected: while a birth of a mammal, even the division of a microbe, is an event, speceation is not. Further, the class of "species" itself is fuzzy, as the individuals of ring species make particularly clear.<br/>
The inadequacy of classic trees to describe evolution and speciation seems to have come from studying the aniaml we most care, ourselves. It is clear that Neanderthals, Denisovans and Homo sapients interbred and were not simply radiated from some single ancestor. Now the trees are augmented with vines running from one branch to another.<br/>
How improper, then, the analogy when applied to the evolution of languages? A cultural asset whose transmition is more similar to the horizontal gene transfer of germs rather than the propagation of mammals. Or, perhaps, the reverse mistake has been made, and we forgot that the member of the Capulet and Montague could get together. English a Germanic language, a descendent of Anglo-Saxon? Birch *please*, excuse me if I say I recognize the nose of the neighbor across the street.

<hr/>
