---
title: The Disunity of the Mind
layout: essay
status: "Putting out ideas"
firstPublished: ""
lastEdit: "December 6, 2018"

menuInclude: yes
menuLink: yes
menuTopTitle: Essays
menuTopIndex: 1
menuSubs:
- title: The Disunity of the Mind
---

Originally I wanted to call this essay "The Dividuality of the Mind" or "The Divisibility of the Mind", playing on the term "individual". The word "individual" suggests a certain completion, wholeness: as if one can take a person out of her environment or out of a group, and inspect her in this seclusion while not affecting the other parts of the group ––– who are autonomous as she is ––– nor environment which is like the background against which she operates, but one cannot divide the person qua person to smaller parts. This notion of individuality subscribes to the way most of us humans feel about ourvelves, feel ourselves or at least our mind to be, namely, a unit: of agency, of cognition, of whatever it is that we feel our minds "do". However, I don't think that our mind is really as unified as we feel it to be. 

Of course, with the advent and progress of neuroscience, peolpe become aware to the fact that the brain, as an organ, has parts, each of each fulfills some other function, and popular science in particular ––though "academic science" as well–– ascribe functionalities to different parts, naming some nucleai or gyri or cortices the "fear center" or "reward center", and ascribing higher level roles to neurotransmiters such dopamine and seratonin. The overall picture, I think, is that the brain is like a well organized hierarchical company where every employee has his role which he fulfills in harmony with the interests of the company, or a car where every part has its function and altogether they make this one single car. What I would want to argue for is a mind that is not so centralized and well coorinated, more like a company where every employee seeks to fuifill his own interests, and in general is not a "unit", not a single entity, in any meaningful way. 


# Summary of Thought Experiments
**Thought Experiment I: intercerebral communication**<br/>
Imagine we take two persons, Alice and Bob, and hook up their brains together through a single neuronal connection: in Bob's brain there's an "artificial neuron" that receives input only from	 Alice's brain. What kind of information could Alice transmit to Bob through it? A very limited one, something that can be transmited with a single [spike train](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/spike_train). What if we increase the number of such artificial neurons? At which point will Alice be able to "communicate her thoughts" via this manner to Bob? What if we add the reciprocal connections so that communication goes in two directions?

# Thought Experiment I: intercerebral communication[^B2BExperiment]
Let us assume we have two persons, Alice and Bob. We create a direct and unidirectional communication channel between their brains in the following manner: there's an artifical neuron in Alice's brain, with dendrides but no axon; it can recevie input like all the other neurons in Alice's brain, but it doesn't propagate a signal like they do. Bob has an artificial neuron in his brain with an axon but no dendrites; it can send signals like the other neurons in Bob's brain but it doesn't receive input from his neuronal environment. 
As you have probably guessed, the communication comes about through the coupling of the two artificial neurons, say through wireless transmission. We assume that otherwise the artificial neurons are akin to other human neurons so that they communicate through [action potentials](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Action_potential), that is, a binary-like signal. Whenever Alice's AN "should have" fired, Bob's AN fires. Through the means of wireless communication,[^Wireless] Alice and Bob virtually share a neuron which receives information only from Alice's Brain and sends information only to Bob's.<br/>
What kind of information can Alice transmit to Bob via her AN? That depends on the signaling capabilities of the neuron. For simplification, let's assume the total duration of its action potentials is 5 ms. Alice's –– and therefore Bob's –– AN can fire up to 200 action potentials a second. it can remain silent (0 action potentials), or, at any given second, it can fire any number of action potentials between these two values, 0 and 200. If we assume there are 200 five milisecond intervals in a second, the number of different one second long signals (patterns of zeroes (no action potential) and ones) is 2^200. However, if you have less than 200 action potentials in a given second, say only a hundred, then the number of possibilities to distribute them over that one second is infinite –– you could "move" backward or forward in time an action potential by a 1/100 of a milisecond, or 2/100 of a milisecond, and so on ––– the question, of course, is whether Bob's brain can disginguish between these different signals. And the answer is no, the number of meaningfully different signals cannot be infinit, given restrictions imposed by biophyisical limitations –– stemming from the way the neuronal cells operate –– as well as more macro limitations such as Bob's brain size and the neurons on which his AN impinges. <br/>
The study of how neurons [encode and decode information](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Neural_coding) is currently more hypothetical than conclusive, and perhaps its challenges can be related to those of interpreting how artificial neural networks, being rather black boxy, are making their decisions. Either way, one doesn't expect at this low level of a single cell the encoding to be anything like a Morse or an ASCII code where different 0/1 patterns code arbitrarily different information.<br/>

[^B2BExperiment]: When I first concieved of this thought experiment, I was not aware that it was carried out in actuality, albit with some difference in detail that is significant. Also the difference aside, I find the experiment somewhat not so interesting because, to put it one way, I find that they were sort of "cheating". In the experiment a binary signal was delivered, 0 or 1, using TMS ([transcranial magnetic stimulation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Transcranial_magnetic_stimulation)) applied on the receiving party. The criterion for the positioning and stimulatin level was that when deliverig the "1" signal, the TMS elicits phosphenes ––– the "hallucination of light". Beside putting a limit on the complexity of the signal possibly delivered in this way (there's only so much room for different kinds of phosphenes incoding different channels of a signal), the fact that the stimulation is applied to the brain is secondary. They could have just as well applied, instead, a minimally perceiveable shock to a limb, for example. Of oourse, we might ask ourselves whether such a direct person to person communication has to be received onto the CNS (central nervous system). One certain experimental apparatus comes to mind, designed to assist blind people, which encodes visual information input into cameras on a head mount onto a grid of little motors laid on the person's back. Here the input reaches the brain really indirectly, going through tactile sensation, but one could imagine some sort of grid of electrodes that directly stimulate nerves on the back ––– though that would then coocupy the domain used by the brain to receive information about dorsal touch and pressure. A person that got well acquainted with this apparatus would be necessarily synesthetic: even if typical "visual input" and "doral touch input" are different enough that one could mostly differentiate the two and experience them appropriately, presumably there would be way to touch that person's back to cause him visual hallucinations, or "show" him certain imagery that would cause him feel tactile sensation on the back.<br/>
	nonetheles, what seems to speak in favour of direct input to the brain itself is its vastly more complex wiring that presumably could interpret and handle direct external input better than if such a signal came upstream through the spine. Whither in the brain is another question, and depends on the purpose of the communication. I can imagine that input to the cerebellum would be idea for certain real-time fast-paced interpersonal communication.<br/>
	Lastly, concerning this paper, the interpersonal part is rather gimmicky. The "B2B" (Brain to Brain) part is really composed of BCI and CBI (Brain-Computer and Computer-Brain interfaces, respectively), and neither part was really necessary for the other; especially the fact that the "emitter" was in India while the "receivers" were in France gave the feeling that it was more for show than anything. They could have just as well tested merely the communication of zeros and ones from a computer, without it being somehow sources from another human being (which makes no difference here), or just the encoding of zeros and ones into a computer by humans. Certainly we all had known for a while that internet functinos very well between India and France. <br/>
	*[Conscious Brain-to-Brain Communication in Humans Using Non-Invasive Technologies](/docs/dom/2014-Grau.pdf)*, Carles Grau, Romuald Ginhoux, Alejandro Riera, Thanh Lam Nguyen, Hubert Chauvat, Michel Berg, Julià L. Amengual, Alvaro Pascual-Leone and Giulio Ruffini, 2014.

[^Wireless]: This is not necessarily for the thouught experiment, the signal between the artificial neurons could have also been transmitted through some wire, but it helps simplify the imagined scenarion and adds a flexibility by allowing Alice and Bob move independently. As far as I'm concerned, the mode of communication between the ANs is beside the experiment. 

Let's make some assumptions.<br/>
1. Generally speaking, ANs behave like other neurons in their environment. 
2. Neurons are mostly silent, i.e., not firing.
3. A pattern of action potentials within a small time frame (e.g. one second) conveys the same information as any such pattern output by the same neuron on a different time, but only translated in time. That is, this pattern at noon conveys something about the time it fires, and the same pattern at 13:00 conveys something relating to that time; otherwise it's the same infromation. For example, if the pattern means "that which is at the center of my vision is higher than my head", then if it fires at 12:00 it means that that which I look at at the time, for example, a window, is higher than me. If it fires again at 13:00 when I look at a bird, the pattern doesn't mean that some window is higher than my head, but rather that which I look at: the bird.
4. Neurons are noisy, i.e., unreliable/low fidelity, and therefore the meaningfully different signals it outputs must be distinct enough that they are consistently distinguished between despite the noise. To use a textual example, if you have a low quality telegraph apparatus that sometims blotches letters, then you don't want to use "fan" and "fin", or "moon" and "mono" as distinct description that could potentially mixed up. Or, a somewhat more empirical example, this issue is surely the reason why cheques denote the sum to be paid both in digits and in words ($10.55 & ten dollars and fifty five cents): the digits are easier to parse, but they are potentially prone to error due to ambiguous hand-writing, so the less-suseptible to error words are there for verification and clarification. 
5. Different signals output by one and the same neuron, such as different patterns of action potentials fired during a short time interval, encode information that cannot be "arbitrarily" different, but refers to i.e. different degrees or variations of the same information. For example, with steady action potential firing ("spiking") a high frequency signal would encode the information that strong pressure is being applied on some area of the body, low frequency would denode low pressue applied, and no signal would encode no pressure applied (other than the constant atmospheric pressure). 

In the context of a single neuron it is problematic to speak of "information", a slightly higher level concept, but at the end this meant to merely be a thought experiment and so we shall be a little loose on the technicalities. 

With this kind of setup, what could Alice communicate to Bob via the ANs? Probalby only very specialized or general informatin. It could signal her happiness, that is, fire whenever she is happy, and with greater intensity when she is happier. Or she could nevigate him through a maze: no firing means "go straight", low frequency means "go right" and high frequency "go left". She could communicate any kind of binary or scalar information. 

What about if there were two or three such AN? They could either be used to communicate disparate information, such that one encodes her happiness and the other movement directions, or they could communicate different features of one and the same entity, such that one signals Bob in which direction he should go while the other signals how fast he should move.

Now let's take this further and ask, how many such ANs are necessary for Bob to read Alice's thoughts? But this meant do be an active communication on Alice's part rather than an intrusiveness of Bob, so we'll frame it thus: how many such ANs are necessary for Alice to communiate her thoughts to Bob?<br/>
To answer this we must first clarify the question. The first task is to define what a "thought" is. 

What is a thought? First of all, a thought is an activity in the brain, though not all brain activities are thoughts. A thought has a temporal beginning and an end.[^ThoughtLength] One can have different thoughts, so that any one thought is a particular pattern of brain activities. Can one person have the same thought twice? we can ask for Heraclitus. <br/>
A thought is brain activity that handles the representation of the world but in some sense[^ThoughtEvocation] is not immediately evoked by the external world. A thought is a calculation made 


[^ThoughtLength]: How long must a pattern of activity last for a thought to be a thought? The brain makes many calculations all the time about the external world, and at first it seemed to me that many of these we would not consider "thoughts" because they are too short in duration, for example all kinds of perceptual inferences. But thinking about it, it seems to me that all calculations are thoughts, and that it is most evident when expectations are broken, that is, when the caluclations were ––– in an empirical sense ––– wrong. For example, let's say Alice is observing a ball that is moving, for example a basketball being played with or a ball in a pinball machine. Generally she correctly estimates the direction and speed in which the ball will move in the immediate future based on the forces acting on it, but on one moment her expectations were absolutely broken, to which she might say, "Oh, I thought it would move the other direction", an expression that would make sense to most of us. But if there was a thought there, it must have lasted a very brief time. <br/>
	Despite being short in duration, it still seems like there's an element of time, a duration here. We could bring a couple more examples that do not involve movement. Let's say Alice and Bob are listning to some third person talking, perhaps in a movie. They later discuss his speech, and it becomes apparent that they heard different things. Alice agrees that what Bob heard, "line", makes more sense than what she heard and she might tell him, "I thought he said wine". She could have also said "I heard him say wine".  Is the "thought" in the first expression the very same notion as the usual sense of "thought"? Let's take another example. Alice sees a pictue of an [Ames room](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ames_room) in which two persons are standing on opposting corners. She has only a brief look and later whe she is asked some questinos about the people there and is revealed what went on there, she might have said "I thought Zoe was much bigger than Yves". We can decouple here a few things. First, it seems that the impression that led her to that "thought" was very brief. Indeed, she only had to look long enough inside the room to make sense of it ––– any sense, not the "correct one". At this stage it is merely a perception. After that she might be thinking about Zoe and Yves; she invtied them by phone to dinner at her place and now was wondering what chair she should have prepared for them, according to their sizes. This thinking includes that brief perception in it, but this thinking lasts significantly longer than the duration of percpetion on which she bases her thinking on. Ok. But now let's say that while she was looking into the room, having formed an idea of their relative sizes, Yves and Zoe come towards each other and hug in the middle –– sudddenly their relative sizes are very different and Alice realizes that her thought about these was wrong.<br/>
	Perhaps, then, a thought is the outcome of a computation about the world, as in "just a thought", and thinking is the process of generating that outcome, that is, making a calculation about the world? Its duration is a secondary character. But that's not quite it, either. I think that "a thought" really contains not just the conclusion –– like opinion or knowledge –– but also its derivation from some observations and knowledge. When Alice says, "I think that X" she communicates the conclusion of a thought,[^IThinkThat] and she might also elaborate with her derivation by adding "because" (an elaboration that is also an answer to "why" ––– as opposed to answering how did one come about thinking about that topic. It is clear that "why" refers to the content, asks for the causality in the derivation rather than the causality behind the thinking)<br/>
	
	
[^IThinkThat]: The English expression "I think that..." is also used to expresses an opinion, so that it is equivalent to the less commonly used "It's is my opinion that". However, in Hebrew and German, for example, there are common expression that distinguish between opinion reporting and reporting of a thought process or conclusion. 


<hr/>
